Padmini, also known as Padmavati, was a legendary 13thâ€“14th century 
Indian queen (Rani). The earliest source to mention her is Padmavat, 
an epic fictionalized poem written by Malik Muhammad Jayasi in 1540 
CE. The text, which features elements of fantasy, describes her story 
as follows: Padmavati was an exceptionally beautiful princess of the 
Singhal kingdom (Sri Lanka). Ratan Sen, the Rajput ruler of Chittor 
Fort, heard about her beauty from a talking parrot named Hiraman. 
After an adventurous quest, he won her hand in marriage and brought 
her to Chittor. Alauddin Khalji, the Sultan of Delhi, also heard 
about her beauty, and laid siege to Chittor to obtain her. Many 
events occurred during the period of the siege, till the fort was 
finally taken. Meanwhile, Ratan Sen was killed in a duel with Devpal, 
the king of Kumbhalner, who was also enamoured with Padmavati's 
beauty. Before Alauddin Khalji could capture Chittor, Padmavati and 
her companions committed Jauhar (self-immolation) to protect their 
honour. After her sacrifice, the Rajput men died fighting on the 
battlefield.

Several subsequent adaptions of the legend characterised her as a 
Hindu Rajput queen, who defended her honour against a Muslim invader. 
Over the years, she came to be seen as a historical figure, and 
appeared in several novels, plays, television serials and movies. 
However, while Khalji's siege of Chittor in 1303 CE is a historical 
event, the legend of Padmini is supported by little historical 
evidence. Most modern historians have rejected its authenticity.