ʿAlāʾ ud-Dīn Khaljī (r. 1296–1316) was the second and most powerful 
ruler of the Khalji dynasty that ruled the Delhi Sultanate in the 
Indian subcontinent. Alauddin wished to become the second Alexander (
Sikander Sani), and this title of his was mentioned on coins and 
public prayers.

He was a nephew and a son-in-law of his predecessor Jalaluddin. When 
Jalaluddin became the Sultan of Delhi after deposing the Mamluks, 
Alauddin was given the position of Amir-i-Tuzuk (equivalent to master 
of ceremonies). Alauddin obtained the governorship of Kara in 1291 
after suppressing a revolt against Jalaluddin, and the governorship 
of Awadh in 1296 after a profitable raid on Bhilsa. In 1296, Alauddin 
raided Devagiri, and acquired loot to stage a successful revolt 
against Jalaluddin. After killing Jalaluddin, he consolidated his 
power in Delhi, and subjugated Jalaluddin's sons in Multan.

Over the next few years, Alauddin successfully fended off the Mongol 
invasions of India, at Jaran-Manjur (1297-1298), Sivistan (1298), 
Kili (1299), Delhi (1303), and Amroha (1305). In 1306, his forces 
achieved a decisive victory against the Mongols near the Ravi 
riverbank, and in the subsequent years, his forces ransacked the 
Mongol territories in present-day Afghanistan. The military 
commanders that successfully led his army against the Mongols include 
Zafar Khan, Ulugh Khan, and his slave-general Malik Kafur.

Alauddin invaded, conquered and plundered the Hindu kingdoms of 
Gujarat (raided in 1299 and annexed in 1304), Ranthambore (1301), 
Chittor (1303), Malwa (1305), Siwana (1308), and Jalore (1311). These 
victories ended several Hindu dynasties, including the Paramaras, the 
Vaghelas, the Chahamanas of Ranastambhapura and Jalore, the Rawal 
branch of the Guhilas, and possibly the Yajvapalas. His slave-general 
Malik Kafur led multiple campaigns to the south of the Vindhyas, 
obtaining a considerable amount of wealth from Devagiri (1308), 
Warangal (1310) and Dwarasamudra (1311). These victories forced the 
Yadava king Ramachandra, the Kakatiya king Prataparudra, and the 
Hoysala king Ballala III to become Alauddin's tributaries. Kafur also 
raided the Pandya kingdom (1311), obtaining a large number of 
treasures, elephants and horses.

During the last years of his life, Alauddin suffered from an illness, 
and relied on Malik Kafur to handle the administration. After his 
death in 1316, Malik Kafur appointed Shihabuddin, son of Alauddin and 
his Hindu wife Jhatyapali, as a puppet monarch. However, his elder 
son Qutbuddin Mubarak Shah seized the power shortly after.